# Time-series modeling of parish survival trends
# Will My Church Survive?
An Analytical Study of Financial Vitality 
Goal of the Capstone Project
In this Capstone Project, my goal is to develop a model to predict whether a church will be able to keep its door open in the long run based on their financial vitality, defined as the ability of a parish to maintain their financial operations and membership.  I will be looking at the publicly available parochial data from Episcopal parishes, coupled with Tapestry demographic datasets derived in part from U.S. census data. While this current model will be built based on the data of The Episcopal Church, my hope is that this can be applied to other types of religious organizations with some adjustments on a case by case basis. 
Prior to this project, the prediction of church survival was often done on an actuarial basis, without necessarily taken into consideration the multifaceted dynamics of church financial viability such as membership and neighborhood shifts. My model will take into consideration the financial and demographic data to predict the most likely outcome for a given church. In other words, will a church close or open? Even if a church predicted to close does not end up closing, the prediction is still helpful as a warning sign which can inform policies and planning.

Financial Structure of U.S. Religious Organizations
While the general public may tend to focus on the spiritual and charitable aspects of religious organizations, there is actually a financial aspect to make sure they can carry out their mission and purposes. Bona fide religious organizations in the United States are governed by both local and federal legislations in regards to their operations. If they qualify under the definitions of 501(c)(3) organizations by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS), they can become tax-exempt.
Despite their exemption from taxation, the financial health and survival of a religious organization in the United States still relies on multiple factors such as pledges, endowment, investment income, grants, bequests, donations for specific purposes, etc. Those employed by religious organizations rely on the financial health of those institutions to make a living as well as for future retirement. 
Therefore, for my Capstone Project, I have decided to use The Episcopal Church as an example to demonstrate the how the confluence of a myriad of factors can be leveraged for descriptive, predictive, and prescriptive analytics when ascertaining the financial vitality of a given religious organizations.

Structure of The Episcopal Church
The Episcopal Church is the U.S. member of the worldwide Anglican Communion, a cluster of national and cross-national Provinces across the world, descended from the Church of England throughout the colonial history of the United Kingdom and subsequent missionary efforts. A Province consists of a cluster of dioceses, which in turn, is composed by a number of parishes or missions. 
In the United States, the parishes of The Episcopal Church derive their tax-exempt status from their local diocese, which is created by the acts of the triennual General Convention, the bicameral governing body of The Episcopal Church consisting of the House of Bishops and the House of Deputies. Dioceses typically pay an apportionment from their budgets to the central Episcopal Church, while their parishes pay assessments to support their dioceses. In addition to these expenses (typically average 12 to 15% of their budgets) to suppor the governing structures, parishes also need to budget for paying staff members and their benefits, maintenace and upkeep of their buildings and grounds, and any outreach and missions to benefit the wider community, such as food bank and energy assistance. 

Financial Vitality of Episcopal Parishes
While by law, a parish is a non-profit organization not required to turn a profit in their balance sheet, financial viability still, in a large measure, governs their ultimate success and survival. At the very least, they would need to ensure that their revenues balance their expenses year after year. Traditionally, most U.S. churches largely rely on the annual pledges from their members to keep their doors open. Over time, members with deep ties to their parishes often designate a bequest, hoping to help benefit their church communities in perpetuity. Those bequests become part of a parish's endowment, which can be earmarked or at the vestry's discretion. As a result, some parishes rely more on the income from their endowment for their survival as opposed to pledges from their existing members, sometimes due to demographic changes that resulted in a reduction in membership. Very few parishes can actually rely on their endowment to consist perpetually. There is a delicate balance between membership and the rate of giving. Depending on the outcome of that balance, there can be implications on staffing and the programs and services that a parish can  provide to attract and retain members. 
As mentioned earlier, my goal is to develop a model to predict whether a church will be able to keep its door open in the long run based on their financial vitality, defined as the ability of a parish to maintain their financial operations and membership.  I will be looking at the publicly available parochial data from Episcopal parishes, coupled with Tapestry demographic datasets derived in part from U.S. census data. While this current model will be built based on the data of The Episcopal Church, my hope is that this can be applied to other types of religious organizations with some adjustments on a case by case basis. 
